# Combining Progresive Delivery With GitOps And Continuous Delivery

Three phrases keep popping up when talking about modern workflows and development and deployment techniques. We have **continuous delivery** as a way to automate complete lifecycle of applications from a commit to a Git repository, all the way until a release is deployable to production. Then we have **GitOps** as a way to define the desired states of our environments and let the machines handle the converge the actual into the desired state. Finally, there is a lot of focus on different deployment strategies groupped under the umbrella of **progressive delivery**. They are all focused on iterative release of features aimed at making the process safe, preventing downtime, and reducing the blast radius of potential issues.

While those three practices and the tooling behind those are focus on specific areas, the "real" benefits are obtained only when they are combined. Nevertheless, many did not yet reach that stage. Each of those practices alone can be daunting and, frankly, scary. Yet, we are going to explore how to combine them together and see the benefits such a solution might provide.

Through a hands-on demo, we will combine [Argo CD](https://argoproj.github.io/argo-cd/) as a tool of choice for applying GitOps, [Argo Rollouts](https://argoproj.github.io/argo-rollouts/) for progressive delivery, and [Codefresh](https://codefresh.io/) for continous delivery pipelines that will tie those two together with the rest of the steps needed in the lifecycle of our applications. If we are successful, we might be able to remove humans from all the actions coming after pushing changes to Git repositories.
