Q: Each year we have a different concept, different speakers, different tracks and surprises. The only constant is our passion for what we do and... you. It is the fourth year in a row when you are speaking at DevExperience and we feel like you are part of the family. How do you feel about coming each year to DevExperience and what can you tell us about the evolution from the first year until now?

A: DevExperience is evolving. Year after year, the organization is better, talks are improving, and the attendees and more and more engaged. Such an evolution is not specific to DevExperience, but can be observed in many other conferences. What is special about DevExperience is the sense of community is maintained year over year. While evolution of other conferences leads to increased number of sponsored talks and overal comercialization of the conference, I feel that DevExperience keeps maintaining the spirit and the principles it had from the first edition. The main reason I keep coming back is that sense of community. When there, I feel like I'm at home, surrounded by friends.

Q: It looks like the big companies like Facebook, Netflix, Amazon etc are moving at an incredible pace while the rest of 95% are stagnating. What the others need to do to reach continuous delivery and 100+ deployments per day?

A: It is questionable whether an average company can ever reach the greatness of Netflix, Amazon, Google, and similar companies. No matter how much wee improve, they aree improving even faster. The gap is becoming bigger, not smaller. But, that does not mean that we should give up, bacause that will surely result in death. We will be destroyed by competition if we let down our guard. The only way forward is to be better and faster. To do that, we need to forget what we know. We need to dismantly our corporate structures, we need to disawow our culture, and we need to get rid of our processes. We, efectivelly, need to start over. We need to stop doing what we're doing, and start from scratch. The most effective way to do that is by creating a startup within our company. By creating an entity that is not encumbered by existing (and outdated) processes, we can embrace those created by companies that proved to know better that us how to develop and deliver software. The important thing to note is that the change of technology is the easiest part. Changing ourselves is what prevents us from improving.
 
Q: Why do you think Kubernetes is so successful? 4-5 years ago there were probably very few people that heard of it, while now the ecosystem is huge. What just happened in such a small period of time?

A: The answer is simple. Everyone agreed that Kubernetes is the API standard for managing both infrastructure and applications. By everyone, I mean every software vendor. One probably cannot find a software company that does not work on their next version to be kubernetes-native. Whichever applications you use in your system (e.g., Jenkins, MoongoDB, Redis, etc) you know that the focus is now on Kubernetes. I do not remember that something like that ever happened before. This is the first time that everyone agreed on some sort of a standard. As a result, everyone has vested interest in seeing Kubernetes move forward and many companies are spending significant amount of their engineering effort through contributions to the project. As an example, our (CloudBees) current generation of software is fully focused on Kubernetes, so we have interest in making sure that it continues growing and that it is stable. That interest is reflected through contributions to the project.
 
Q: If you were now the CTO of a well established company, would you use a cloud offering for your Kubernetes platform like EKS, AKS, GKE or try building yourself with kubeadm or kops or kubicorn still on a cloud platform?

A: There is no doubt in my mind that I would go with public cloud. My would I waste my effort with something that is not my business? If my goal is to deliver applications to my users, than I should put all my attention to that goal, and let others manage things that I need, but are not part of my business. Infrastructure is one of those non-core things. Every minute someone spends on infrastructure-related tasks is a minute not spent on producing value to my users. That value is for most of us development and delivery of new features. That logic does not apply only to infrastructure. The same can be said, for example, for databases. Do I have to run databases reliably? Yes! Should I spend my time making sure they're running or let someone else do it for me knowing that someone probably knows batter than me how to run it? The answer is in "someone else", unless running databases is my core business. The only case when I would not go with public cloud is if infrastructure or services are my business. If that's what I'm selling to my users, than I have to treat that as my core business and take full control.

Q: For a company adopting now kubernetes, what do you think their first steps should be? What should they look after when launching their first kubernetes cluster live?

A: Do not launch Kubernetes cluster yourself, unless you have to. Let Google, AWS, Azure, or any other cloud provider with managed Kubernetes offering do that for you. Concentrate on learning how to operate applications running inside your cluster, not on running the cluster itself.

Q: Would you keep stateful applications (like a mysql or mongo database) inside a cluster? Maybe use an operator for it?

A: I would run everything (including stateful applications) inside a Kubernetes cluster. But, that would be my end game. Some types of applications benefit a lot from running inside Kubernetes, other benefit less, while same see oonly moderate benefits. Start with stateless applications. Among them, pick those that are designed in 21st century (e.g., scalable, small, fault tolerant, etc). Use them to extract as much benefit from using Kubernetes as possible. Then start mooving back in time, all the way until you reach those applications designed many yeears ago (e.g., big non-scalable monoliths that cannot replica data and sit on some basement collecting dust).

Q: While working with the companies that adopted devops for quite some time, what are they still struggling with? What are the next silos and handovers that need to be eliminated?

A: Very small percentage of companies adopted DevOps. Many are saying that they are "DevOps certified", but most failed to truly embrace DevOps. You can easily distinguish "fakers" with two simple questions. "Do you have DevOps engineers?" "Do you have DevOps department?". If the answer to either of the two questions is "yes", that company did not yet even understand what DevOps. Instead, it's "faking" it just as many "faked" agile, big data, and many other trends. Most of the companies did not yet do the first "real" step. Most do not understand that DevOps is about building empathy by creating self-sufficient teams that are in full control of an application, from requirements to running and monitoring their applications in production.

Q: I know that you like go now and I can see that huge projects are built with it like docker, terraform or kubernetes. But why should a backend developer start learning it, why java or .net core is not enough?

A: Instead of answering that question directly, I'll answer with yet another question. Think of the application you've been working for years now. It is likely application designed long time ago. Such design was likely based on ideas and practices that were valid back then, but are mostly obsolete today. You're doing your best to keep improving that application by constantrly refactoring it and making it more in line with the current tendencies. And yet, you cannot shake the feeling that application will never be young again. No matter how much refactoring you do, it will always contain things based on principles from the past that are not valid any more. Now, imagine that you start from scratch. You and people around you know how the old application works. You know what works well, and what doesn't. If you start from a clean slate, it is almost inevitable that your new application will be better than the new one, simply because you'll use your past experience and combine it with today's needs. The result will almost surely be something much better. I believe that the same is true for Go. It was created by pople with very deep understanding how Java, C, and a few other languages work. On top of that, it was based on acknowledgement that what we need today is much different that what we needed when those languages were created. Simply put, Go is a language designed to help us tackle today's problems, while Java, C, .Net were designed to solve problems we had years ago. No matter how much you're trying to improve those languages, their core principles are today obsolete. Similar change are happening all the time. Go will be replaced by some other language. It will become obsolete over time, just as everything else does. But, that day is not today. Go is the best language we have for building performant, scalable, and distributed systems.

Q: Tell us a little more about your talk at this edition of DevExperience, but also about your workshop from this year. Who should register and what will they learn there?

TODO: Continue