# Who Received DevOps Party Invitations?

DevOps is the word of the year. Everyone speaks about it, many are hoping to apply it, even though most are confused what it truly means.

Inquiring about DevOps does not seem to help. If you speak with a software vendor he'll tell you that all you need to become DevOps ninja is to purchase his product. Puppet, Chef, Ansible, Docker, Terraform, Packer, Jenkins, Nexus, Git... Every software vendor seems to have a DevOps sticker attached to his product. You'll notice those stickers being right next to "we make Docker easy" and "we convert your architecture into microservices".

Truth be told, software vendors are not the only people offering DevOps nirvana for a moderate price and a promise eternal faithfulness. Coaches and consultants are having their moment as well, even though they tend not to promote a single solution. You just need to adopt Agile across the whole organization, apply XP practices, implement continuous deployment, convert your applications into microservices, and attend at least three thousand daily standups. Your journey will begin once you accept all those DevOps prerequisites and commit to many others that will be discovered throughout the process. Consultant will have a gig of a lifetime and you will be trilled by the prospect of reaching the promised land.

It does not end there. Job market is full of offers for a *DevOps engineer* positions even though such a thing does not exist. I'm still not sure what it even means. The most sensible explanation for such a position is that someone replaced the word operator with *DevOps engineer*. You will continue working in a silo, you will continue being in charge of the same processes and tools, and you will continue receiving JIRA tickets with requests to create a new server. But hey, look at the at the bright side. You got a new title! Isn't that peachy? Don't worry if you're a battle tested sysadmin. The same rules apply. Your future is secured as long as you change your title to DevOps engineer.

Now that you converted all your operations personnel and sysadmins into DevOps engineers, the next step is to employ a few more. After all, DevOps is the new thing and you have to spend the extra budget that comes with the promise of converting the organization into the next generation Disneyland.

Once you converted all operators and sysadmins into DevOps engineers and added a few more, you need to have a department. Actually, you already have a it but the name is inappropriate. Since you are brilliant and quick witted, you renamed it to *DevOps department* before anyone else comes to the same idea. You're not going to let others take away the spotlight. You were in a basement during the agile party. You didn't get the invitation and, frankly, you still hold a grudge. Now it's your time. The DevOps party is about to start and you expect it to last for a couple of years, if not more. You are the star. You're on the stage and your fellow colleagues are in the front row. For a split of a second it seemed like you saw some of the agile folks as well. They're somewhere in the back, together with the rest of those with cheap tickets.

You are jumping on the train without having a ticket. You're faking it. The only question is whether you're self deceiving yourself and others out of ignorance or as part of a sinister plan.

Let's go back to the chaos created by myriad of tools and practices you have to adopt if you'll ever become "DevOps certified". There are too many to handle and, as a result, we're experiencing brain overload. It's close to impossible to understand what's going on. What you need is an understanding where you are, where you're going, and how do you plan to get there. Believe me, those questions are much harder to answer than it looks.

When you find out where you are, you will understand what your strengths are, what is your current state, what your problems are, and so on. You will establish your starting point.

Figuring out where we are requires a high level of objectiveness. An honest answer will probably mean that someone will get hurt. It's never pleasant to discover that you're not at the top of the hill. It is painful to find out that, when compared with the competition, you are not as good as you thought you are. You are looking for answers that will situate you (the company) within the industry as a whole and, more importantly, allow you to understand the gap between you and the leaders. Be prepared for a disappointment.

Once you know where you are, you can start figuring out where you want to go. That part is not as hard as it seems. All you have to do is look at where the leaders are. Polyglot projects, small and self-sufficient teams, agile, DevOps, microservices, continuous delivery or deployment, containers, schedulers, cloud, everything as a service, removed administrative overhead, adoption of new programming languages, and so on and so forth. We know where the leaders are. It's enough to visit a couple of conferences and listen to speakers from Google, Netflix, Zoolando, Amazon, Uber, CloudBees, Docker, and other companies that are shaping the industry. In today's world where attracting talent is harder than ever, companies are competing who is going to be more transparent and sway top engineers to work for them. There are no secrets.

The problem is not how to find out where industry leaders are but admitting their state to yourself. The gap is so huge that we tend to think of excuses instead absorbing the collective knowledge of the top 10 percent. I would be a rich man if I've got a dime every time I heard phrases like "that does not apply to us", "our industry segment is special", "yes, but", and other excuses our brains formulate as a self-defence when faced with that immense gap between us and them.

Without knowing where the industry leaders are and acknowledging the gap between you and them, you will not be able to define your destination. You will not be able to understand what you might need to achieve. Chances are that you can do much more than you think. The major obstacle is admitting the gap.

Once you know where you are and where you must go, you can start planning the steps that will get you there. Please note that I did not say "where you want to go". That ship has sailed. Unless you are among top five percent of the companies, you are not in control of your destination any more. Your competition is. The best you can do is catch up. Your destination is where the others are. Only when you get there can you decide where to go next. Reach the top first and then think where you'll jump.

You dig the hole yourself and now there's only one way out. Hurry up before someone finds a shovel and starts burying you alive. If you are not quick, you might end up sharing your resting place with Kodak, Nokia, and other companies that were not capable understanding the ever shifting nature of the industry.

Today it's DevOps. Tomorrow it will be something else. You're either defining what the future will look like, or you're trying to catch up with today's trends, or you're living on borrowed time. There is no forth category.

# From Agile To DevOps: The History Of Faked Results

Long long time ago, in a galaxy far far away, we would divide SDLC (software development life-cycle) into stages. We would define, plan, code, build, integrate, test, release, deploy, and operate. For the sake of simplicity, I'm ignoring the fact that testing comes after almost every stage and placed it after the integration phase. Business analysts would define what should be done, managers would plan it, developers would code it, and so on. That was the way waterfall worked. If you don't know what waterfall is, you are probably very young and very lucky.

TODO: Diagram

While those stages still exists we managed to shorten them to days, or even hours, instead months or weeks. Agile did that or, at least, that what it was supposed to do. We were supposed to put everyone to the same team, iterate quickly, and deploy often. Did we manage to do that? Some did, most didn't. I can the expression of disbelief on your face. Surely I am wrong. Everyone is agile! Let me present some numbers before you disard my claim of poor agile adoption.

According to studies from 2016, 33% of companies are having agile upstream teams. I'm not going to name the company behind the study. I'll just tell you that it starts with *Fore* and ends with *ster* and let you discover who it is. What is *agile upstream* you might ask? Well... It's a clever way to put a name onto a failure. Now you probably think I'm delusional. Nobody calls anything agile related a failure. Stay with me.

Agile upstream is a collective name for the first half of the SDLC tasks. It includes defining, planning, coding, and building. Integration, testing, releasing, deploying, and operating considered downstream.

The same study states that only 13% of the companies are practicing agile downstream. Do not take those numbers for granted. It does not really matter whether it is really 13%. What does matter is the relation between those numbers. Less than half of the companies employing agile upstream is practicing it downstream as well. Those numbers do not make sense. They are, in a way, a proof that many companies are not being honest.

TODO: Diagram

The whole division into upstream and downstream was invented as a politically correct way to say agile and not-agile. It is a very nice way to distinguish progressive teams from those who are less willing to change. It is a way to admit that agile failed to include half of the departments. Or, maybe, that they failed to adapt. I think that one of the main reasons is coding. The increase in the speed of the upstream teams cannot be followed by those working downstream without coding. The party requires an invitation and only coders got it. If you do not code, you cannot follow the speed. Manual testing is the thing of the past (excluding exploratory), operations based on SSHing into a machine and copying and pasting commands from a Word document is bordering insanity, and monitoring based on an army of operators watching dashboards is a very poor substitute for alerting.

As a result, we got agile upstream teams iterating weekly, daily, or even hourly while those downstream still need weeks to months for a single iteration. The problem is that the total speed is the speed of the slowest. It does not help (much) if half of you are running very fast, hitting a wall, waking up from unconsciousness, and repeating the process over and over again. As long as that wall is there, increase of your speed does not increase the speed of delivery (at least not considerably). Time-to-market is still measured in months.

Such a gap between those involved with upstream and downstream tasks produces friction, and friction produces heat. It is no wonder that "blaming" continues being part of the culture. After all, those teams have very opposing objectives. Upstream teams want to release a feature as soon as it's finished. If possible, they would benefit greatly if it is in production the moment they commit it to a repository. After all, they are in charge of developing those features and want to see business benefits as soon as possible. Downstream, on the other hand, is mostly conecrned with stability. If taken to an extreme, the best way to have a stable system is to never deploy anything. Every change is a potential risk. Long story short, one group would like to deploy all the time while the other would benefit from never deploying.

The result of such a missmatch between those upstream and downstream can take different directions. One possible outcome is the increase in the gap and the increase of the high of the walls that divide those silos. I hope everyone understands by now that such a direction would be disastrous. Even die-hard traditionalists are not proposing decrease in cooperation. At best, they might hope for an extension of status quo.

TODO: Downstream people moving to upstream teams or upstream teams taking over downstream jobs.